# DrowsinessDetection

About half of U.S. adult drivers admit to consistently driving while feeling drowsy. About 20% admit to falling asleep behind the wheel at some point in the past year – with more than 40% admitting this has happened at least once in their driving careers. And due to this, every year, more than 6,000 people die due to drowsy driving-related crashes - and that is in the US alone. In 2013, drowsy driving caused 800 deaths, 44,000 injuries, and 72,000 crashes. Usually, those who drive while drowsy put those around them at the greatest risk. However, fatalities due to drowsy driving can easily be avoided with premature knowledge and early notification. We do not always notice when we are getting drowsy and putting ourselves and the others around us at risk as we are usually too preoccupied with our daily and busy routines. Thus, it would be helpful to stop drowsy driving-related car accidents in the future with premature warnings to the driver. 
In this project, we use a method that utilizes computer vision to identify facial expressions and cues that indicate drowsiness. In our method, we first calibrate the system for the user and calculate baseline values. Next, a Haar Cascade Classifier is used to isolate images of the user’s eyes. These images are then fed into a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) to classify the eyes as opened or closed. After that, we use the Dlib facial landmark detector to identify and locate the face and the facial landmarks. Using locations of these facial landmarks we determine if the user’s eyes are closed or if their mouth is wide open. If the mouth is wide open, this indicates a yawn. The closing of the eyes is the most dangerous side effect of drowsy driving and because of this we use two different methods to determine if their eyes are closed; in the case that one of the methods fails, the other can act as a safety net. As the system is running, we classify the user in one of 3 categories: alert, low vigilance, or drowsy. Our method is tested on the University of Texas at Arlington Real-Life Drowsiness Dataset (Ghoddoosian, 2019), which is a dataset containing 180 different videos divided into three categories of drowsiness, which include alertness, low vigilance, and drowsiness. In the end, our classification system was able to reach an accuracy of 85% for drowsiness, 88% for alertness, and 57% for low vigilance.
